The 2019—2020 wildfire season in Australia broke many records for the worse.

>> Let's start with the kindling.

In the couple of years leading up to the 2019 bushfire season, record low rainfall plagued many parts of Australia.

This, along with record high heat, led to severe and prolonged droughts, turning vegetation into easily combustible fuel.

In a 2019 report on the severe weather conditions the eastern parts of their country were facing, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology wrote that, quote: The daily Forest Fire Danger Index values observed during this event were above anything previously observed in most of these areas so early in September."

>> And so the fires began.

In Queensland, Australia, there was a peak of 80 fires burning on a single day.

In total, thousand of buildings were destroyed, and about 30 people were killed.

But the impact on the human species is minimal compared to the impact on native Australian animals.

During the fires, many natural barriers, such as rivers and gullies, once depended upon to bound the flames, were too dry to stop sparks from leaking across habitats. 

The rapid and largely unstoppable flame fronts led to most above-ground animals incinerated. Low-metabolism tree-dwellers such as koalas were among the most vulnerable.

>> The only way to survive was to find shelter.

Some animals were able to take refuge in burrows or little pockets of unburnt land, but these islands of life are far from capable of supporting such a large influx of population.

Ecologist Michael Clarke told Nature in an interview, quote: After fires in 2007, one unburnt patch I visited… was literally crawling with birds. It was clearly insufficient to sustain them all.

>> But after the fires, survival is no easier

“It is deathly silent when you go into a forest after a fire.”

The survivors will emerge to lands completely barren, void of food and shelter. Predators could easily seek the prey in an environment with no vegetation to hide behind.

>> So what's the future?

While it will take months to find out the full extent of the damage, Clarke predicts that due to the vast coverage of the fires, ecosystems will take a longer time to recover than in the past.

There will be a shortage of habitats for both local and migratory animals in the years to come. Many bird species that annually migrate to Australia have their stop-over points in the southeastern coast destroyed. And those with habitats that were already tiny before the fires, like the Kangaroo Island dunnart, will be pushed to the edge of extinction.

While the immediate short-term fire protection measures will involve preserving life in the little pockets of unburnt land and doing controlled burns to keep future fires out, I think these won’t be addressing the root issue.

Ultimately, the increasingly frequent, increasingly severe, and increasingly large fires were brought on by climate change. And I believe that while short-term measures are important, we have to address the root problem causing the fires, a problem that is unfortunately being ignored by many Australian politicians.

nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00043-2